
PartMC
======

PartMC - Particle-resolved Monte Carlo code for atmospheric aerosol simulation

Version 1.1.0  
Released 2008-02-17

<http://www.mechse.uiuc.edu/research/mwest/partmc/>

Copyright (C) 2005-2008 Nicole Riemer and Matthew West  
Portions copyright (C) Andreas Bott and Richard Easter  
Licensed under the GNU General Public License version 2 or (at your
option) any later version.  
For details see the file COPYING or
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html>.


Dependencies
============

Required dependencies:

   * GNU make
   * Fortran 90 compiler
   * NetCDF - <http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/>

Optional dependencies:

   * Python - <http://www.python.org/>
   * MOSAIC - Available from Rahul Zaveri - <Rahul.Zaveri@pnl.gov>
   * MPI - <http://www.open-mpi.org/>
   * ScientificPython - <http://dirac.cnrs-orleans.fr/plone/software/scientificpython/>
   * PyX - <http://pyx.sourceforge.net/>

PartMC can be compiled out-of-the-box on Fedora 8 with all
dependencies except MOSAIC if the following packages are installed:

   * gcc-gfortran-4.1.2-33
   * netcdf-3.6.2-4.fc8
   * openmpi-1.2.4-1.fc8
   * ScientificPython-2.6-10.fc8
   * PyX-0.9-5.fc8

Installation
============

The various helper scripts and testcases assume a Unix environment
(tested on Fedora 8 Linux and OS X 10.4). The Makefile requires GNU
make. The default compiler is gfortran.

To build TAGS or the .deps dependency files set `DEV_BUILD = yes` in
the Makefile. The .deps dependency files are rebuilt using
`tool/f90_mod_deps.py`, which requires Python.

The NetCDF libraries are required to compile PartMC. The `netcdf.mod`
Fortran 90 module file is required, and it must be produced by the
same compiler being used to compile PartMC.

PartMC can interface to the MOSAIC chemistry code (see above for
availability) but this is not enabled by default. To use MOSAIC,
uncomment the `MOSAIC_LIB` and `MOSAIC_FLAG` variables in the Makefile
and set `MOSAIC_MODDIR` and `MOSAIC_LIBDIR` to the appropriate
directories. If MOSAIC is built in `/opt/mosaic`, for example, then
`MOSAIC_MODDIR` should be `-I/opt/mosaic/datamodules` and
`MOSAIC_LIBDIR` should be `-L/opt/mosaic`. Without MOSAIC support the
`test/mosaic` testcase in PartMC will fail.


Usage
=====

The main `partmc` command reads `.spec` files and does the run
specified therein. Either Monte Carlo runs, sectional code runs, or
exact solutions can be generated. A run produces binned summary data
in a NetCDF file which can be plotted with the included python
scripts. Monte Carlo runs can also output the full internal state in
an ASCII format that can then be processed with `partmc -p` to produce
the same summary NetCDF data.

There are a number of examples provided in the `test` directory that
can be run by the `run.sh` scripts. These use the python scripts with
ScientificPython and Pyx to plot the results.


Coding Conventions
==================

The code is mainly Fortran 90, with a few parts still clearly showing
their Fortran 77 heritage.

Extensive use is made of Fortran 90 derived types and pointers for
dynamic memory allocation of arrays inside derived types. Derived
types are named `my_type_t` and are generally defined in modules named
`pmc_mod_my_type` within files named `my_type.f90`. Each derived type
has allocation and deallocation functions `my_type_alloc()` and
`my_type_free()`, respectively.

The auto-generation of module dependencies relies on a particular
naming convention. The module names must be the same as the name of
the containing file, but prefixed with `pmc_mod_`. Thus the module
`pmc_mod_condensation` is contained in the file
`condensation.f90`. The dependencies are autogenerated by the
`tool/f90_mod_deps.py` python script, which is called automatically by
the Makefile to regenerate dependencies if `DEV_BUILD = yes` is set.


Debugging
=========

To debug the parallel code run it with:

    om-mpiexec --mca mpi_abort_delay -1 -n 2 ../src/partmc golovin_mc.spec 

then run the debugger with:

    gdb ../src/partmc <pid>

and use `bt` to get a backtrace.

To turn on MPI debugging info add the `-d` parameter to
`mpiexec/mpirun`. To restrict the transport to only TCP use the `--mca
btl tcp` option.

ChangeLog
=========

1.1.0 - 2008-02-17

  * Internal reorganization to use Fortran 90 derived types for the
    data structures.

  * Integration with the MOSAIC gas- and aerosol-chemistry code.

  * Output is in binary NetCDF format.

  * Parallel implementation using 1D mixing.

1.0.0 - 2007-02-26

  * First release, including hierarchical coagulation and full water
    condensation.
